Transparent Machine Learning for Information Extraction: State-of-the-Art and the Future

Laura Chiticariu (IBM Research – Almaden), Yunyao Li (IBM Research - Almaden), Frederick R. Reiss (IBM Research – Almaden),

The rise of Big Data analytics over unstructured text has led to renewed interest in information extraction (IE). These applications 
need effective IE as a first step towards solving end-to-end real world problems (e.g. biology, medicine, finance, media and entertainment,
etc). Much recent NLP research has focused on addressing specific IE problems using a pipeline of multiple machine learning techniques.
This approach requires an analyst with the expertise o answer questions such as: “What ML techniques should I combine to solve this problem?”; 
“What features will be useful for the composite pipeline?”; and “Why is my model giving the wrong answer on this document?”. The need for 
this expertise create problems in real world applications. It is very difficult in practice to find an analyst who both understands the real
world problem and has deep knowledge of applied machine learning. As a result, the real impact by current IE research does not match up to 
the abundant opportunities available.

In this tutorial, we introduce the concept of transparent machine learning. A transparent ML technique is one that: (1) produces models 
that a typical real world user can read and understand; (2) uses algorithms that a typical real world user can understand; and
 allows a real world user to adapt models to new domains. Although most recent IE research focuses on techniques
that are opaque—not transparent—there is a significant minority by various researchers from industry and academia that does not. The main goal
of our tutorial is to highlight this line of work and motivate new research directions that will lead to more transparent machine learning in IE, 
resulting in greater impact in solving real-world problems. We categorize, compare and analyze recent advances in this area, providing a systematic 
view of the stateof-the-art. We cover transparent machine learning techniques for both learning features useful for information extraction, as well as 
learning complete extractors. We also share our experience and lessons learned on building an enterprise information extraction
system integrated with multiple transparent machine learning techniques.


Outline

1. Motivating Examples [30 minutes]
	 Examples of real-world applications
	 Practical challenges
		– Accuracy
		– Scalability
		– Transparency
		– Usability

2. Transparent Machine Learning for Information Extraction: Introduction [10 minutes]

3. Transparent Machine Learning for Information Extraction: State of the Art [80 minutes]
	 Learning features for information extraction [40 minutes]

	 Learning extractors [40 minutes]

4. Case Study: Building an End-to-End Transparent Enterprise Information Extraction System [45 minutes]
	 Design considerations
	 Overall architecture
	 Transparent machine learning techniques
	 Live demonstration

5. Conclusion: Research challenges and future directions [15 minutes]

The tutorial is aimed at IE researchers in both the academic and industry communities who are interested in developing and applying transparent ML. 

Instructors

Laura Chiticariu is a Research Staff Member at IBM Research – Almaden. She received her Ph.D from U.C. Santa Cruz in 2008. Her current research
focuses on improving developmental support in information extraction systems.

Yunyao Li is a Research Staff Member and Research Manager at IBM Research – Almaden. She received her Ph.D from the University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor in 2007. She is particularly interested in designing, developing and analyzing large scale systems that are usable by a wide spectrum of users.
Towards this direction, her current research focuses on enterprise-scale natural language processing.

Frederick Reiss is a Research Staff Member at IBM Research – Almaden. He received his Ph.D. from U.C. Berkeley in 2006. His research focuses on improving
the scalability of text analytics in enterprise applications.



