Robust Semantic Analysis of Multiword Expressions with FrameNet
Miriam R. L. Petruck  and Valia Kordoni 

Multiword Expressions (MWEs) are ubiquitous in natural language. Despite advances in technology, 
MWEs remain a serious challenge for Natural Language Processing (NLP) because of the difficulty in 
automatically recognizing, acquiring, and interpreting such forms.

Specifically, MWEs are not nearly as frequent in NLP resources as they are in real-world text, and this 
problem of coverage may impact the performance of many NLP tasks. Moreover, treating MWEs also 
involves problems like determining their semantics, which is not always compositional (as when kick the 
bucket means ?die?). Thus, MWEs are a critical issue and a current weakness for natural language parsing 
and generation, as well as real-life applications that depend on language technology.

This tutorial will give participants a solid understanding of the linguistic features of multiword 
expressions (MWEs), focusing on the semantics of such expressions and their importance for natural 
language processing and language technology, with particular attention to the way that FrameNet 
(framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu) handles this wide spread phenomenon. The tutorial is geared toward 
researchers and practitioners of language technology, not necessarily experts in MWEs or knowledgeable 
about FrameNet, who are interested in NLP applications (such as machine translation, information 
retrieval, and question answering) that involve or could benefit from considering MWEs as a pervasive 
phenomenon in human language and communication.

Outline
Part I: General Overview of MWEs
a.	Introduction
b.	Types of MWEs
c.	Syntactic and Semantic Characteristics of MWEs
d.	Representational Issues in MWEs
Part II: MWEs in FrameNet
a.	Overview of FrameNet
b.	FrameNet?s treatment of MWEs
c.	Navigating Lexicon and Grammar
d.	Exploiting FrameNet Information on MWEs
Part III: Computational Processing of MWEs
a.	Recognizing elements of MWEs: type identification	
b.	Recognizing how MWE elements combine: syntactic and semantic variability
c.	Disambiguation of MWEs		
d.	Compositionality and Interpretation of MWEs
Part IV: Robust Semantic Analysis of Multiword Expressions in FrameNet: main challenges

Miriam R. L. Petruck (miriamp@icsi.berkeley.edu) received her PhD in Linguistics from the University 
of California, Berkeley. A key member of the team developing FrameNet almost since the project?s 
founding, her research interests include semantics, knowledge base development, grammar and lexis, 
lexical semantics, Frame Semantics and Construction Grammar.

Valia Kordoni (evangelia.kordoni@anglistik.hu-berlin.de) received her PhD in Computational Linguistics 
from the University of Essex, UK. She joined the Department of English Studies, Humboldt University 
Berlin in 2012, where she is Research Professor of Linguistics. Her main research interests are in deep 
linguistic processing, semantic analysis, and multiword expressions.
